Add enhancement proposal to support Alternator API (#1406)
scylladb/scylla-operator: enhancements/proposals/1405-alternator/README.md

# Support for ScyllaDB Alternator

## Summary

> This proposal aims to introduce proper support for enabling Alternator for ScyllaClusters 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal aims to introduce proper support for enabling Alternator for Scylla Clusters 
```

Author: we are intentionally putting those together as it's the exact CRD name

we may ignore the value in a future release. In this release, and with the new changes, it is intended for it to retain the existing behaviour for backward compatibility.

### User Stories

#### Automatic certificate
As a user I want to enable Alternator API, and have serving certificate and key automatically generated.
To configure the clients to trust the certificates I'll use the provided serving CA from a ConfigMap.

#### Custom certificate
As a user I want to enable Alternator API and provide my own serving certificate and either ensure it is signed 
by a CA that clients implicitly trust or provide them with an appropriate CA on my own.

#### Ingress
As a user I want to expose Alternator API using an Ingress.
This allows me to expose it externally without allocating a dedicated IP.

#### Load Balancer Service
As a user I want to expose Alternator API on Service with a load balancer.
This allows me to direct traffic directly through a platform LB on a dedicated IP.

### Risks and Mitigations

Not known.

## Design Details

### API changes for ScyllaClusters.scylla.scylladb.com/v1

> The following API changes show how we'd approximately extend `scyllaclusters.scylla.scylladb.com/v1.spec.alternator` specification. Only new fields are shown for existing structs.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I'm seeing the port definition (8043 by default, I assume) ?

Author: yep we chose `8043` - described in https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-operator/pull/1406/files#diff-e7c253eebc3e6c9a4c7923ddf75c5c939cfe058d9cf01f085803b4974c2f378eR38

	// +optional
	OperatorManagedOptions *OperatorManagedTLSCertificateOptions `json:"operatorManagedOptions,omitempty"`
}

// AlternatorSpec hold options related to Alternator API.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="( has(self.port) && self.port != 0) ? self.insecureEnableHTTP != false : true",message="insecureEnableHTTP can't be false when using (insecure) port."
type AlternatorSpec struct {
	// insecureEnableHTTP enables serving Alternator traffic also on insecure HTTP port.
	InsecureEnableHTTP *bool `json:"insecureEnableHTTP,omitempty"`
	
	// servingCertificate references a TLS certificate for serving secure traffic.
	// +kubebuilder:default:="{type:"OperatorManaged"}"
	// +optional
	ServingCertificate *TLSCertificate `json:"servingCertificate,omitempty"`
}
```

### Certificates

Given we aim to always enable HTTPS we need to provision default serving certificate. Operator will create signer Secret `<sc-name>-local-alternator-serving-ca`, save the CA bundle into ConfigMap `<sc-name>-local-alternator-serving-ca` and create serving Secret `<sc-name>-local-alternator-serving-certs`.

> Serving certs will be valid for 30 days and rotated from 20 day mark.

Reviewer: This looks unusual low validity and quick rotation. I'm aware of 90 days or 1 year as more regular defaults.

Author: This is in line with the other certificates we create.

I've seen 1y to be used only with manual renewals, I think Let's Encrypt prod CA is on 90d but mostly because some of the clients are not automated and this was a compromise between that. Security wise the lower the better. 1 month still gives enough time to deal with issues while giving a good security policy.
